2.0 Background information and terms

Some background information and definitions are required to understand some
of the parameters used by D3-3780.  The next two sections are background 
information.

2.1 The "Std" and "Tran" abbreviations as used in D3-3780

In 3780 two different framing formats are used to transmit files.  The 
standard format is fine for sending text files but cannot transmit certain 
special characters (the data gets confused with the protocol's framing 
characters).  The transparent format can send all possible characters.
D3-3780 transmits and recognizes either format and allows different buffer 
translations of each.  The abbreviations "Std" and "Tran" are used
throughout D3-3780 to refer to standard and transparent framing formats,
respectively.

2.2 The names "Vary", "Fixed", "Binary" and "Hex" as used in D3-3780

An actual 3780 workstation formats the data buffers somewhat differently in 
transparent mode than in standard mode.  The standard mode sends variable
length records separated by record separator characters with consecutive 
spaces compressed.  This buffer format is referred to in D3-3780 as 
"Vary" (short for variable).  

The format most commonly used in transparent mode sends all 80 characters 
in a record and does not send record separators or perform space compression.  
This mode is referred to as "Fixed".  Both "Vary" and "Fixed" formats use 
the EBCDIC character set (D3-3780 performs ASCII/EBCDIC translations when 
sending or receiving).

Another commonly used format is one in which ASCII data is sent and received 
from the PC without being converted.  This will be referred to as "Binary".  
"Binary" data should normally be sent transparently since there is no 
guarantee that invalid characters will be in the file.  The transparent 
"Binary" mode can be used to send executable files from one PC to another. 
Many emulators use this format including UDS' "Bsc" and AST Research's 3780.
Some IBM mainframes are also set up to receive in this mode including the
IRS'.

D3-3780 has a buffer format called "Hex".  This mode transforms ASCII pairs
into bytes and vice versa.  It is primarily useful as a diagnostic tool.
This is not a true trace in that the 3780 framing and control characters are
not written out.  A true trace will be added soon.
