6.0 Command Summary by Class

This section lists all the commands and has some fundamentals about how and
when they should be used.  The following sections have in depth descriptions
of some of these classes of commands.  Chapter 7 has in depth descriptions
of every command.


Branching Control Commands
--------------------------
These commands affect the the logical flow of the command files.  Section
6.1 discusses this class of command in detail.  The commands:

call   clrca   end     go      if      ife     ifef    ifi     ifo     ifp     
ifs    ift     il      on      ret     xb


Quick and Dirty File Commands
-----------------------------
These commands allow some simple file manipulation.  Section 6.2 discusses
these commands in more detail.  The commands:

app    load    save


File Commands using handles
---------------------------
These commands allow some extensive file manipulation.  Section 6.2 discusses
these commands in more detail.  The commands:

astat  clall   close   frite   fstat   gbuf    open    pbuf    rdln    read
seek   tell


Other File Commands
-------------------
These commands are copies of standard DOS commands.  Section 6.2 discusses
file commands.  The commands:

del    dir     er      ld      size    ren


Communications Buffering Commands
---------------------------------
These commands are used to save incoming data so that it can be easily 
manipulated within the command language.  The individual descriptions
of these commands in section 7.0 provide more detail.

bdn    bdp     buf


String Processing Commands
--------------------------
These commands provide a variety of string and memory manipulation features.
Sections 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6 provide more detail as to their operation.

allst  cat     cpy     lwr     setbf   slen    sptr    srite   stc     stst    
upr


Connection Control Commands
---------------------------
These commands are used to establish and break connections with a host or 
another PC.

aa     c       dl      ds      kl      m


Modem Diagnostic Commands
-------------------------
These commands are used to test and determine the type of modem in the PC.
The are primarily used if the modem or its configuration is suspect.

mo     mome    mv      


General Diagnostic Commands
---------------------------
These commands provide diagnostic capabilities for debugging command files,
determining what is occurring on the line and storing logs of information to
disk.

astat  dt      lf      ss      st      svals   td      tr      vals


General Commands
----------------
?      *       comp    da      help    intrp   p       redir   rstrt   tk      
uncmp  w


DOS Call commands
-----------------
These commands allow the D3-3780 command files to call DOS and execute batch
and/or executable programs.  See section 6.3 for more information on these
commands.

>      .       /


Sending Commands
----------------
These commands send information to the remote computer and sometimes request
information back from the remote.

rem    s       ss      svals


Receive Control Commands
------------------------
These commands control the file names and buffer conversions used for files
received.

dn      dp     w 


Screen Control Commands
-----------------------
These commands control the appearance of D3-3780.  More information on how
these commands can be used to control the screen is provided in sections
6.7 and chapter 8.

cls    drite   dsup    getxt   key     lscrn   lstvs   putxt   redsp   rite    
stoff  ston    sup     undsp   unsup   vtype


Number Manipulation Commands
----------------------------
These commands are used to perform numeric calculations and assignment on
integer, character and pointer variables.

dec    inc     mov     opr


Program Termination Commands
----------------------------
These commands terminate the command file and/or D3-3780.

enz    end     ex      fq      q       qnz


Memory Allocation Commands
--------------------------
These commands allocate memory, free previously allocated memory and/or
adjust the size of previously allocated memory.  Section 6.5 discusses these
commands in detail.

alloc  allst   free    reall


System Initialization Commands
-----------------------------
These commands are used to set up and modify the system's configuration.
Chapters 7 and 9 have detailed descriptions of these commands and their
usage.

lscrn  lstvs   mseth   sdefs   setpr   sform   smask   smax    so      sptyp
tabls  vtype


6.1 Branching Control Commands

The branching commands are commands which cause a batch file to resume 
execution at another line in the file.  The destination of branch can be
a label, absolute line number, relative line number or a D3-3780 command.

If the destination is a label then execution will begin at the line following 
the label.  All labels must begin with a colon ":".  

If the destination is a number and is not placed in "<>" symbols then it is
assumed to be an absolute line number.  If the number is placed within the
"<>" symbols then the number is added to the current line number and execution
will continue there.  The number can be negative if placed within the "<>" 
symbols (thus branching up that number of lines).

If a quoted string is included in the destination field then the string is 
assumed to be a D3-3780 command.  The command will be executed and (unless the
command is another branch command) execution will continue on the following
line.

If a destination field is left blank (two consecutive commas or no "=" sign
in an "on" command) then execution will continue on the next line as if no 
branch command had been encountered.

The "on" command is used to branch to different locations depending on the
value of a variable.  The following example demonstrates all four types of
branch destinations (the values to the immediate right of the "=" signs are 
destinations).

Example:
Line  Data
1.    * The "*" that starts this line makes it a comment.
2.
3.    * The "dl" command below will set the ei variable
4.    dl "1-(205)-881-8183"
5.    on %ei,0=:lbl,1="ex",2=<-2>,4=3
6.
7.    * If ei is 0 then execution will begin at label
8.    :lbl
9.    * This is the line which will execute if dl is successful.  

If the value of ei is 0 then execution will continue on the line follwing the 
label ":lbl" (in this case line 9).  If ei=1 then the command "ex" will be 
executed to leave D3-3780.  If ei=2 then execution will continue on line 
(6-2)=4 which contains the "dl" command.  Notice that the line the line counter
is equal to the line after the current line (6 rather than 5).  This means that 
a "-2" is required to go to one line backward.  if ei=4 then execution will 
begin at line 3.  Otherwise execution will continue at line 6 as if no branch
had occured.

An option which is significant to operation of the branching commands has to do
with the mb variable.  This variable determines if the branch locations will be
determined by a table in memory or whether the file will be searched for the 
appropriate value.  The memory table executes much faster but requires a fair 
amount of ram.  This variable defaults to 1 which means memory branching.  If 
the value is set to 0 then branches will be performed by performing file 
searches.  The value applies to the initial command file and any files loaded 
using the "XB" or "CALL" commands (the configuration file never uses memory 
branching).  If you are using some large buffers in your command file and get
the "Insufficient internal memory" error (number 93).  Then you may want to set
the value of mb to zero in the configuration file.

If there is insufficient internal memory to perform memory branching then file
based branching will automatically be used.


6.2  File Commands 

Section 6,0 lists three classes of file functions: "Quick and Dirty", 
"Commands using Handles" and the "Other file commands".  

We'll start with "Commands using Handles".  The first parameter in these 
commands is a number which is associated with the a specific file.  This 
number is referred to as a "File Handle".  The allowed file handles are 0 
through 9.  Before any of the handle based file operations can be used the
file must be "open"ed to associate the file with the handle (that is the sole
purpose of the "open" command).  This command creates a file if the file 
doesn't already exist or opens the file for read only if it does exist 
(this can be changed using an options parameter).  When you are through 
processing a file the "close" command is used to free up the desired handle.

There is an implied location in the "handle" based commands at which reads and
writes occur.  This location is referred to as the file pointer.  The "seek"
command is used to explicitly move the location of the file pointer and the
"tell" is used to read the location of the file pointer.  The file pointer is
advanced whenever a read or write is performed on the file.  In this way,
successive reads will continue to read through the file from beginning to end
and successive writes will continue to append data to an open file.

The quick and dirty file commands save you the trouble of having to open, 
close, etc. files.  These commands need only the file's name as a parameter.
The main drawback of the quick and dirty commands is that they can only work
on a buffer full of data at one time.  For example, there is no way to read
a part of a file which is farther in the file than the size of your buffer.
However, many operations can be done simply by using these commands.

The other file commands are essentially DOS replacements that stop you from
constantly having to shell to DOS.  There are also some alias command names
("er" for del and "ld" for dir) which are included for compatibility with the
Bsc command language.


6.3 DOS Call commands

The DOS call commands allow D3-3780 command files to call a other programs,
batch files and built in DOS commands (such as "copy").  

The ">" and "." are useful only when running interactive since they require
a key to be pressed before returning to DOS.  The "/" is useful even as a 
remote command or when the DOS command does not display useful information.

There are several possible problems when calling another program however:

  The DOS program may destroy the screen.
    Since a DOS program is not aware what D3-3780 may have displayed it is 
    likely to write over valid parts of the screen.  The "redsp" command
    can be used to regenerate the direct screen after running the DOS command.  
    Also, the output of many DOS programs can be redirected to a file.  The 
    contents of the file can then be written to the screen using D3-3780's 
    video writes.
    
  There may not be sufficient far memory to run the program.
    If there is not enough memory to run the program then there is little that
    can be done in D3-3780.  The only things are to get rid of excess memory
    resident programs.
     
  When running unattended the DOS Program may expect user interaction.
    If the DOS shell is loaded as a remote command on an unattended PC (see 
    the "rem" command) then the remote will "hang up" waiting for keyboard 
    input.  If a program can accept redirection then the input to the remote
    program can come from a file.  Otherwise, the program cannot be run on
    unattended remotes. 
  
  The program called may be so time consuming that messages are missed.
    If a program takes a large amount of time at run time then D3-3780 may
    miss activity on the line.  Fortunately, it takes from 10-30 seconds for
    a communication to fail and then it can be retried until successful.
     
Despite these possible problems the DOS shell command is a very powerful 
command.  It is especially useful when running a remote unattended.  See the
description of the "rem" command in chapter 7 for more information on these
features.

  
6.4 Data Copying Commands (determination of buffer length)

The data copying commands take data from one location (or file) and store it at
another location (or file).  The locations in memory are referred to using
pointer variables.  The commands use similar techniques to determine the length
of their arguments.  The commands which this refers to are:

Source Lengths:
app	pbuf	save

Destination Lengths:
bdn	bdp	buf	cat	cpy	gbuf	load	rdln	setbf  

There are five ways in which the length of the buffer may be determined: 

  1. For string operations by copying until a hex 0 is reached. 
	  If manipulating strings, then the first actual "0" (not an ASCII 0 but
	  the actual number 0) will indicate the length of the source.

  2. Limited length of source data.  If the source data is of limited size then
	  it is common for the buffer to be larger than the size of the data 
	  being copied.

  3. By passing a length. 
	  This value is merely a positive integer indicating how many bytes 
	  to use at the location pointed to.  If it is larger than the amount 
	  of space allocated at the location then an error will be generated.  

  4. By passing a pointer to the first location NOT to be overwritten. 
       If a buffer created with a single "alloc" command is being used for 
	  more than one thing and the first part of the buffer is being used for
	  the desired operation then the pointer to the second buffer can be 
	  passed.  This will assure that the memory at and beyond the second 
	  value is protected.  If the 
	  
  5. By using the built in length value for the value.  Pointer variables 
	  carry around an internal variable which indicates the number of bytes
	  to the end of the buffer they point to.  This is generally the default
	  value if the length parameter is left blank.


Some commands use the hex 0 in the file detected in the source to stop the 
transfer and others do not.  Refer to the individual command descriptions to
determine if the command treats a 0 specially.  The explanation of the "app"
command in chapter 7 has examples of several of these length specifications
being used.


6.5 Memory Allocation Commands

These commands control the dynamic allocation of memory.  Sections 5.6 and 5.7
have a great deal of relevant information concerning the use of the pointers
with these commands.  There are a couple of points I want to emphasize here:

  1. The "alloc", "allst" and "reall" commands set the length value associated
	with the pointers which are passed to them as arguments.  This value will
	be used by most data movement commands.

  2.	The "alloc" and "allst" commands will automatically free any non-NULL 
     pointers that are passed to them.  If you keep reusing the same pointer
	then an intervening "free" command is not required.  However, if a pointer
     is non-NULL but does not point to dynamically allocated memory then it 
	should be set to NULL before using it as an argument to one of these 
	commands.
	

The individual descriptions of these commands in chapter 7 will supply more
detailed descriptions of them.


6.6 Other pointer assignment commands

Three commands can be used to assign values to pointer variables that to not
allocate memory at the same time:

mov	stc	stst    

When these assignments are made then the length values associated with these
pointers must also be set.  In all cases the length value will be set to
indicate the number of bytes from the location that the pointer points to and
the end of the allocated buffer into which it points.  For example:

  alloc %p0,500
  mov %p1,&p0[100]

The length of p1 will be 400=500-100.  In this way the end of the buffer will
not be overwritten in the data movement commands.


6.7 Screen Control Commands

The screen control commands are covered in extreme detail in chapter 8.  Here
we will discuss some of the fundamentals.  The next section will explain the
"rite" command and give examples.  

In the D3-3780 package there are fundamentally two different kinds of screen
writes: Serial and Direct.  The Serial writes take place in a window which
scrolls upward as more information is written.  This window contains the
flashing cursor and video writes always begin at the cursor.  The cursor will
remain at the line following a serial write.  Direct writes can be written 
anywhere on the screen without regard to the cursor and do not (normally) 
affect the cursor.  The words "serial" and "direct" will be used frequently in
the following descriptions.  The commands affect the different kinds of writes
as such:

	Commands which affect Serial Writes Only:
	cls		key		rite		sup		unsup   

	Commands which affect Direct Writes Only:
	lscrn	lstvs	drite	stoff	ston		dsup		undsp 

	Commands which affect both Serial and Direct Writes:
	redsp	getxt	putxt	vtype

Generally, the serial writes are the simplest but least powerful tools to the
command file programmer.  If you merely want to throw up some messages to
inform the user what is going on then the serial writes are the way to go.  If
you are wanting to give the package a different look (possibly to match an
application) then the direct writes will be very important to you.  See chapter
8 for more on direct writes.  The following section (6.8) and the command
summaries in chapter 7 supply all that is necessary to use the serial writes
effectively.


Several of the video commands are complementary in that one command
"undoes" the other command.  These commands are:

sup		<-->		unsup     (Suppress/Un-Suppress serial writes)
stoff	<-->		ston      (Suppress/Un-Suppress status variable updates)
dsup		<-->		undsp	(Suppress/Un-Suppress direct writes)
getxt	<-->		putxt	(Save/Restore a window on the screen)



6.8 Format options for writing strings out

The D3-3780 command language has several commands that allow you to write
strings and numbers out.  These are:

rite        ; For writing to the screen
frite       ; For writing to a file
srite       ; For writing to a buffer

These three functions all have a similar syntax in that they all will accept
multiple parameters which can be any combination of scalars and pointers.
I'll use the "rite" function for the examples (since you can immediately
see the results of your command).

The basic syntax of the rite function is:

rite val[;ops][+val[;ops]][+val[;ops]]...

or (with brackets removed)

rite val;ops+val;ops+...

The val is any scalar or pointer and the ops consist of a string (not 
necessarily quoted) that modifies the way the val is output.

Lets start with some simple examples (remember that the "?" is a prompt):

Writing a string

  ?rite "This will be written to the screen"
  This will be written to the screen

Writing a string variable

  ?cpy %db,"This will also will be written to the screen"
  ?rite %db
  This will also will be written to the screen

Writing a scalar

  ?mov %i0,89
  ?rite %i0
  89

Writing a combination of strings and scalars

  ?rite "The number "+<h40>+" is 40 hex"    
  The number 64 is 40 hex

The last example demonstrates how values can be concatenated.  Now, lets go
over some of the formatting options.  The formatting options is a string
that has combinations of letters and numbers to precisely control the
output.  Unlike most strings, the quotes surrounding it can (normally) be 
left off.  The general form of the options is:

         [flags][width][.precision]type

Each field of the string is a single character or number signifying a 
particular format option.  The following describes each field.

Type: The 'type' character determines whether the associated argument is 
      interpreted as a character, string, or integer.  The simplest format 
      string contains only 'type' character.  
      
         D or I  Scalar     Signed decimal integer (scalar default)
         U       Scalar     Unsigned decimal integer
         O       Scalar     Unsigned octal integer
         X       Scalar     Unsigned hexadecimal integer
         C       Scalar     Single character
         S       Pointer    Only way to print a string (pointer default)

Examples:

?rite "The number "+64;d+" is "+64;x+" hex"
The number 64 is 40 hex

?rite "The signed number "+<-34>;d+" is "+<-34>;u+" in two's complement"
The signed number -34 is 65502 in two's complement

?rite "The number "+'A';d+" is an ASCII '"+65;c+"'"
The number 65 is an ASCII 'A'


Flags: An optional sequence of flag characters controls the justification of 
       output and printing of signs and blanks.  
       The flag characters available are:

   Flag                Action                           Default
   컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴컴
              Left justify the result within        Right justify
               the field width.

    +          Prefix the output value with a        Sign appears only
               + or  sign if it is of a signed      for negative
               type.                                 signed values()

    blank      Prefix the output value with a        No blank
               blank (ASCII 32) if the output
               values is signed and positive;
               the "+" flag overrides the blank
               flag, and a positive signed value
               will be output with a sign.

If the "+" or blank is used then the options string must be enclosed in 
double quotes (") characters to stop those signs from being interpreted as 
parameter separators.  Both these options are useful for lining up columns 
of numbers.  More than one flag can be included in the option list.

Example Using Flags (more examples using flags will be with width info):

?rite "This value will always be prefixed with a sign "+90;"+d"
This value will always be prefixed with a sign +90


Width: The optional width specifier is a decimal integer specifying 
       the minimum number of characters to print, padding with blanks 
       and zeros.  Width never causes a value to be truncated.

Examples using Width:

?rite "Wide number padded with zeros "+90;08d
Wide number padded with zeros 00000090

?rite "Wide number padded with blanks "+90;8d
Wide number padded with blanks       90

?rite "Wide number padded with blanks "+90;-8d+" left justified"
Wide number padded with blanks 90       left justified


Precision: An optional precision specifier is a decimal integer preceded by 
           a period (.) which specifies the maximum number of characters 
           printed for all or part of an output field.  It is identical to
           width for numeric output (D,I,U,O,X) but is used in strings to
           limit the length of strings which are output.  This is useful
           when limiting the size of a string.

Examples:

?cpy %db,"This is a really long string which can cause the line to overflow"
?rite "Only 5 characters will be putout '"+%db;.5s+"' ..see"
Only 5 characters will be putout 'This ' ..see

?rite "The parameter has no effect if the string is small, "+"see";.8s+" none"
The parameter has no effect if the string is small, see none

Their is one more option which does not fit among these.  An "R" can be put
anywhere in the option string to cause a carriage return after the parameter
has been printed.  As many R's can be included as you want carriage returns.

Examples using R:

?rite "This will be on one line";rs+"This will be on another"
This will be on one line
This will be on another

?rite "Two returns here";rsr+90;0r8d+"the R's can be anywhere"
Two returns here

00000090
the R's can be anywhere

That completes the explanation of formatting options.  They're a bit 
complicated but they are pretty flexible.


