4.0 Interactive Command Line Interface

D3-3780 has an interactive command line interface and a batch interpreter
for running unattended.  These two are very similar in that most of the
commands can be used in either one.  

4.1 Interactive Editing keys

When you are at the D3-3780 prompt there are several editing keys at your
disposal.  Some of these are similar to DOS' keys but differences exist.
Here is a list of each key and its function:

        F1 : This key has the same function as it does in DOS.  It will copy
             the previous command a character at a time.

        F3 : This key has the same function as it does in DOS.  It will copy 
             the portion of the previous command which is to the right of the 
             cursor to the current line.

        F5 : Abort command but store command so that F1 and F3 will bring it
             back up.

        F10: Delete the entire command.

  Backspace: Moves cursor back (left) one position and deletes the character 
             to the left of the original cursor.  This is identical to DOS.

 Left Arrow: Moves the cursor back (left) one position but does not delete 
             the prior character.  In DOS, this key operates the same as the
             backspace key.

Right Arrow: Moves the cursor right one position unless you are already at
             the end of the command.

       Home: Bring the cursor to the beginning of the command.

        End: Bring the cursor to the end of the command.

     Insert: Toggles Insert/Overwrite mode.  Normally, if a letter is typed 
             while the cursor is over a character in the command the new
             letter will be inserted.  This is insert mode.  If D3-3780 is
             in overwrite mode the old character is replaced with the new
             one.  The cursor will appear as a large flashing block in
             overwrite mode.

     Delete: Delete the character over the cursor.

        Esc: A general abort from any type of failed operation.  Will abort
             a command in the middle of it but will not store the command
             like the F5 key.  In this respect the key resembles DOS' use
             of it.

The individual commands that are specific to interactive mode will be
explained in the command summary.

4.2 Delimiters

Certain characters are used to separate parameters in the commands.  These
characters are generally used in the same ways.  They are not always
interchangeable.  These characters are:

   " " (a space):   Normal delimiter used to separate command and first 
                    parameter.

   "," (a comma):   Interchangeable with a space as far as D3-3780 is 
                    concerned.

   ";" (semicolon): Used for optional parameters that modify mandatory
                    parameters.  The semicolon is used in commands that
                    take a set of parameters to set options that affect
                    the parameter before it.  See the "s" and "rite"
                    commands.

   "+" (plus sign): Used for commands that have a variable number of
                    parameters.  Most commands will actually take a blank
                    or comma also but the plus accurately describes the
                    behavior.

   "=" (equal sign):Indicates either equality or assignment depending on 
                    the command.  Used only in batch commands.

