
9.0 The D3-3780.CFG file and its options

D3-3780 will automatically look for a configuration file.  This file is 
named "D3-3780.CFG" (see the next section for details on how to change 
this name) and is a setup command file.  D3-3780 will look for the 
configuration file first in the current directory and then in the directory
which contains "D3-3780.EXE" (this name can be changed in the next section
also).  If the file doesn't exist then a default setup is used.

The filename can be overridden by putting the filename on the
command line.

Examples:

	C>D3-3780 file.cfg
	C>D3-3780 -Ffile.cmd file.cfg

The configuration file is fundamentally another command file.  However,
there are a couple of significant differences:  

  The most significant difference is that the modem has not been 
  initialized in any way when the file is run.  However, the "MSETH" 
  command can be used to initialize the modem in the configuration file.

  All video writes are automatically suppressed.  The "unsup" and "undsp"
  commands can be used to turn on video writes.  If you intend to use
  direct video writes within the command file then the "undsp" function
  must be performed.

  The branching is done using the slow "searching" technique rather than
  the faster table based technique (see section 5.1 on the "MB" variable).
  The branching technique cannot be changed within the file.

  Assigning values to the "CF" (command file name) and DP (Dash Parameter)
  status variables will have the desired effect.  These variables should 
  only be read in a normal command file but can be use instead of the 
  "-F" and "file.cmd" command line options if used in the configuration 
  file.  This allows D3-3780 to run any file without (DOS) command line 
  parameters.


Typically, this file will be used to save and restore the startup screen and
cursor location and to load the direct video screen and the format strings
for the status variables.  The configuration file itself can contain the
direct video screen and format strings.  See the descriptions of the "LSCRN"
and "LSTVS" options to see how this is done.


9.1 Setting the Package and Configuration filenames.

There is a utility program available to people with an extreme need to
customize D3-3780 named PACKINST.EXE.  This program allows you to 
change the name of the executable and configuration file by modifying the
executable program itself.  Run PACKINST.EXE from DOS with no parameters
and it will ask for three strings:

  The package name is the first parameter it will ask for.  This value is
  used in place of the "D3-3780" string in all prompts throughout the
  package.  If the package name were "packname" then the executable file
  should be "packname.exe", the help file "packname.hlp" and the default
  command file "packname.cmd" (used if -F is not followed by a filename).
  The package name is case sensitive since it is displayed in several
  places in the program.

  The startup (or configuration) filename is the second parameter which
  is asked for.  This name is normally, "D3-3780.CFG".  Any name can be
  used instead.

  The third value is the name of the executable in which to install the
  first two values.  If you have renamed the package from "D3-3780.EXE"
  then the new name should be entered here.  Otherwise press enter.

The installation modifies the executable file itself but does not affect
the time stamp of the executable file.  The time and date values can still
be trusted.

System Initilization Commands
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
lscrn  lstvs   mseth   sdefs   setpr   sform   smask   smax    so      sptyp
tabls  vtype
